This is a test. Today's interview, April 1, 1980,
is with Dr. Patton Burns, retired professor of
veterinary medicine and former head of the
Department of Veterinary Physiology and
Pharmacology, also the author of a little booklet
entitled Veterinary and Medicine at Texas A&M,
1958 to 1978. There we go. Okay, it's working.
Today's interview, April 1st, 1980, is with Dr.
Patton Burns, retired professor of veterinary
medicine, former head of the Department of Vet
Physiology and Pharmacology, and author of this
fine little book, Veterinary Medicine at Texas
A&M 1958 to 1975.
Let's talk about your background first. You're a
native Texan. Yes. You tell me when you were born. I
was born in Cuero, Texas, October 16, 1901. Can you
tell me about your early life, about your parents?
Well, we lived several miles, about four miles
north of Cuero on the Cuero-Yoakum Road in DeWitt
County. And I grew up there. I went to school in
Cuero for 11 years. Of course, we didn't have the
12th grade then. And I graduated there in 1919.
Came here as a freshman in September. And other
than about 10 months in Beaumont, I've been here
ever since, since September 1919. What did your
father do? Did he have a ranch out there? He was a
farmer, rancher. He was? Cattle? Well, mostly
mules. He was a mule breeder. And he had a bunch of
mares and a jack. but he bought quite a few mules.
He'd go down the Rio Grande Valley and buy mules,
and well, any place he could buy them in the state.
But
my brother, two brothers, older brothers, we had
two of them. One was a physician, the other two were
stockmen and ranchers. If he ever bought some
horses or cattle in these deals, well, he'd turn
them over to them. But he had some
black cattle, mules. And my brother had some reds.
And they were always competing with one another. I
think they just kept them as hobbies.
But mostly, I'd say 75% farming and 25% ranching.
Well, I knew him. He had ranched before then.
Oh, by the time I left in 1919, he was turning out
quite a bit of the farm into grazing land. So he was
going back to that. What was he growing? Cotton
mostly. That was a cash crop. A little corn and
maize.
He planted gumes between the corn rows. He was the
first one in the county to build any terraces. He
came to A&M. These formerly short courses of
Congress, as they called them then. He'd pick up an
idea here and there, so he decided to terrace.
Then he was the first one to plant legumes between
the corn rows, and he more than doubled his yield.
But he was a diversified farmer. He liked to do
both. Why did he go down to Rio Grande for the mules?
Is that the best area in that particular town to buy
mules? Well, he could buy smaller mules down in
that part of the country. around Final Furious and
around that area. I believe Hepburnville, below
George West, between that and the border. But they
were smaller mules. Well, what was the advantage
of having a smaller mule? Well, they sold better in
that county. These big Missouri mules, you'd very
seldom see those. They were used by contractors
more. That was before the days of the tractor.
You'd find these big mules on these road
contractors' work. How many acres are in this
ranch? Oh, around a thousand. Really?
Well, about close to 900 in one, and about 250
mother's old place down between Quora and
Victoria.
Did he have any help besides two boys, three boys,
three sons? Well, they were the three sons older
than I were half-brothers. They were two sets of
children. His first wife died when she was about
35. Then he married Anna Wright from Thomaston,
that is between Queroa and Victoria. And she had
inherited some property from her on the old side.
Charles Lockhart was her grandfather. And she had
inherited some from her mother. And the original,
one of the Stephen F. Austin grants. I
still own my share. Do you really? How much is that?
Oh, a little over 100 acres. And it goes all the way
back to the Austin grants? Oh, yes. On your
father's side, too? No on her side, my father's are
more recent. I think my mother's goes back to about
1820s and the 20s. My father's into the 1830s I
think. So her people were here before his. And your
father's forefathers came in the 1830s and lived
in that same area ever since? Well, I've got one
nephew who bought the place, the place that my
father and mother, where we lived, between Cuero
and Yoakum. And he owns it now. And his father had
some ranching north of there, close to Yoakum. He
owns that, and also he inherited some from his
mother. So on that Cuero-Yoakum road, he has about
half of that. land on both sides between those
places. Can you tell me about your upbringing as a
young man? Well, no, just the usual eleven grades
and
working in the summers on the farm. My father
employed to take students and I think merely so
they could keep me some company, but he'd usually
employ larger and stronger ones than I, and I think
with a purpose. I know two football boys, two of
them went to the University of Texas. One was an
outstanding star at the University of Texas. And
they
would do it for exercise, for conditioning in the
summer, work old summer. Some of the boys would
pick six or eight or 10 boys would come out there
right after holidays, and some of them worked too
fast. Some of them would last till 12 o'clock the
first day. Some through the first day. Some
checked out one or two the next two or three days.
Usually end up about three of us left
for the summer. What did he pay them? I think they
usually go in price a dollar a day. The blacks and
the Mexicans around, they got the same thing. Did
he hire blacks and Mexicans also? He hired who he
could get? Mexicans mostly.
But when it came to hog killing time, the Negroes
were there too. How many, did he add hogs in too? Oh
yes, oh yes, we'd kill eight or ten at a time.
That's pretty interesting. Did you ever get any
time off and when you did, what did you do on your
time off? I didn't know what a vacation was then. I
spent on the farm to my advantage because I recall
once staying to football and they those
interested in football practice. I think it was in
eighth or ninth grade, and I stayed for football
practice and got it home by dark. That was the last
time. He said, who's gonna feed those hogs and milk
those cows? We were milking seven cows. And he
said, I'm not gonna do all your work for you. He
said, you help me, but said, who's gonna take care
of those hogs? You can't do some of that work
Effectively after dark. He said, here you are at
dark before you got home. See, I rode horseback. By
the time I got home, the sun was down, gone.
He says, it's more important doing this farm work
than it is playing down on the football field. So
that was the last time I went out. What were your
favorite subjects in high school? I think math was
my favorite. I had a little more difficulty with
it, and
I liked history, and it went right through me. And
easy to come, easy to go. But
I particularly liked Texas history and American
history. In fact, I had those under Walter P. Webb
by now, or at least that was after he left there.
Then he went to San Antonio. He stayed in Coro only
about one or two years. His, Buck Shewitz, I'm sure
you've heard of him, the artist. Buck's father was
chairman of the school board. And he was
responsible for getting Mr. Webb at that time. And
then he went on to the University of Texas and, of
course, gained considerably fame. But I
thoroughly enjoyed my experience with him. Oh,
I liked English and manual training. I don't know
of any subjects I didn't like. Would you consider
yourself a good student in high school? Oh no, I'd
say ordinary. Getting
back to your father's farm or ranch, was it
profitable? Well I used to remember him say that he
would
make an outstanding crop once every seven years in
farming. That's the cycle, and he just enough to
stay in, but I don't remember him having any
difficulty in helping the renters. They were on
halves, they rented on half and half, and he would
for the dry goods and the groceries and the drug
bills during the year, and then they would pay him
back when they got the cotton in the summer. And I
don't know if I remember when he was really in
difficulty, but what I mean by an outstanding crop
that seventh year. Yeah, yeah. But, yes, I think it
was profitable. They were always buying up the
land here and there and adjoining the place,
adding to it. In other words, he had sharecroppers
then? Well, yes. They had the house, but he stood
for their bills during the year. I remember we all
got a 10% discount. I could go in. He told me one day
that he was, I met him on the road, and he said, this
is the last day I want to see you wearing a cap. I
think I was about the sixth grade. He said,
tomorrow you go by, he designated
the store, and get your hat. I think he'd already
picked out the hat. It was a Stetson. Oh, really?
So I've worn hats ever since. Did they have boots
for you, too? No, my brother was the one that wore
the boots. The boots were a little too expensive
for me. But I never saw my brother on a pair of shoes
until we went by. He was 25 years older than I. He was
the oldest one in the family. My wife and I went by to
see him down in Jim Wells County at Alfred. That's
between Alice
and George West.
So I said, Tom, what in the world are you doing
wearing shoes? I said, that's the first pair of
shoes I've ever seen you wear. And he says, hey,
don't have the shoemaker I used to have, Mr. H.
Boney. And he and his son both got boots. And as long
as he lived, they got boots there.
But he says they can't fit me anymore, and he was
very particular. But I remember as a child, about
three years old, I went out in the old manger there,
and a pair of his boots, a hard, had been sewn away.
After they got in the mud, they were about worn out.
They were hard from being wet and mud, but I had to
put them on. And I put one of them on, and there were
three stinging scorpions in the bottom of that.
And I couldn't get the things off. And I stomped,
and I couldn't kill them. So a Negro woman came and
finally got my foot out. But that was my own. Were
you sick? No. Really? It didn't really bother me
much. No kidding. Not nearly as bad as a red ant. Oh,
yeah. Sit down on one of those hills.
Tell me about the renters. How many did you have,
and could you tell me something about the system
that your father had with these renters? Oh, I
recall six or seven Mexican houses that they had on
the place. I have to say
He figured around 40 acres to a man, but frequently
the wives and the children did a lot of work. Some of
them would farm 80 acres and some 120 acres.
Depends on the size of the families.
Let's see, one, two, three, one, three of them in a
row, three, four, five, six. I remember six. I said
seven. I remember six. And then I had another one
down at Palmerston on the Victoria. That would be
seven. And the way he worked it was they grow the
crops and then at the end of the year split things up
50-50? Yes, in other words, he supplied the mules
and the feed and everything. But he got his money
first
in the fall when they sold. Sometimes they'd be in
the third or the fourth bale before this
sharecropper would get a cent. Or he might let them
have a little. But when they first got their first
money that was theirs, they'd go by the meat market
and get meat, lean meat, and make jerky out of it.
And you could go down there and see it on the barbed
wires and the clothes lines up and down these
houses. They'd like to make that jerky.
But
I interpreted for, when he had to leave, I remember
he went in federal court, called it a federal court
in Houston. And he was gone a few days and asked me to
sell the cotton. The merchants couldn't talk
Mexican, and he had some runners who couldn't talk
English. And so, oh, and the doctor, who happened
to be my uncle, came out of the place. I always did
the interpreting for him. He couldn't talk a word
of Spanish. I'd talk Spanish before I could talk
English. And being around these renters, in fact,
my father employed a woman who had taught school in
Mexico. And he told her, not a word of English
around that child. I was about three or four,
three, I guess. And she, her husband was employed,
but he, just as a laborer. And she would come and
help my mother with the dishes. And then she'd take
me home and spend the day. And by the time I got back,
it was about dark. So I got to hear very little
English. And so first thing you know, I was talking
Spanish, and I could handle it much better than I
could English. I talked to them before I could
English. It's easier than English, much easier.
And when I started first grade school, I guess I was
six, and when the teacher would ask me a question,
I'd start answering in Spanish, and I just, it was
natural for me. And all the kids got to laughing, I
could answer it faster in Spanish, because the
words would come easier. And then I started to have
to, that's the way I started learning English, was
in the first grade. It was Aunt Lady? Well, my
mother and sister, and she taught school, and we
were both going to school at the same time through
the fourth grade. I went with her. But...
My mother never did try to talk it, and she got a
little bit impatient and disgusted
with some of them, and come up there and said, no
entiendo, that I don't understand, in other
words. And she couldn't make them understand, and
she called me.
But I liked it. It gave me an entrance to these
Mexicans and oh, I, when they'd have a wedding or
anything like that, I got invited. I went and I
remember my father would not allow drinking nor
gambling on the place. When he ever got one, he
found it drinking. He'd get rid of it.
He didn't like these mechs and talk English. He
says, when they get up, these renters, when they
get up and talk English too much, they don't make
good farmers. They don't know too much. He did it
jokingly. But
I ran into a poker game. I think they were using
grains of corn instead of the actual money. But
they were gambling. It was on a Sunday. And they're
all old. stopped when I walked into the room. And I
walked through the house just like the kids. So I
never did tell on those Mexicans and of course they
knew it and so I was really accepted after that.
When did this renter system stop or when did it end?
Oh, I think it was still going half and half where
the landowner would supply the things. And they
also had renters or sharecroppers who worked on
third and fourth. I believe that was
right offhand, I don't remember which of the
third. One was on corn and the fourth was on cotton,
just opposite. But the one down at Thomaston,
close to Guadalupe River, between Cora and
Victoria, my mother's place, that was on 3rd and
4th. And they'd make a good drop, they'd haul it up
there to home, or either he'd buy it from my father,
but the shack proper owned his own teams.
But that place always paid for itself. Is the
system still functioning today? I don't know.
There are very few farms, nearly all grassland
now, grazing land. Okay, okay. When you were about
16, the United States declared war on Germany, and
there are a lot of German German, people of German
descent in Texas. Do you remember any anti-German
feelings during the war in your last year or two? Oh
yes, in fact I was, Cuero was, Cuero, Yorktown,
Nordheim,
Hallettsville, Schillenberg, Brenham, all
Germans, Germans. There were a few checks up
around Holheim between Cuero and Gonzales. And
there were a few Polish people at Sweet Home
between Yoakum and Hollisville. But outside of
that, nearly all Germans. The checks have
increased greatly. I still take that quarrel
record. It comes out twice a week. And as long as my
sister was living until 78,
I didn't take it, because she always would write to
me and give me the news. But since then, I've been
taking it, and oh, nearly all German names.
Occasionally there's a Smith and a Brown and a
Jones. And I have one nephew in Quirrell, and I have
one in Yoakum. And I very, very seldom see anything
about the name Burns anymore. And oh. See, my
father had four brothers and five sisters. There
were ten in the family. Burns is all over the
county. It's just reversed here. I used to be the
only Burns in the Bryan College Station telephone
directory. Now, there's a terrific column of
them. And the former students, in the former
students, A directory. I had two cousins who
finished here. And,
oh, and a nephew. And I guess there must have been
about six or eight Burnes' in there. And now
there's about two whole columns of them. And lots
of Burnes' students and a lot of people who live
here by that name, too. Blacks and whites. Why do
you think that is? I don't know. I don't know.
Getting back to the war, could you tell me about
some of this anti-German or pro-German cinema?
Well, only I was in school with one boy who was a
German sympathizer. His father was a saloon
keeper, a good man. But these
boys, there were two boys and I think one sister,
And the one I was in, he had a temper. And somebody
hurt him one day, and he was talking about when
Germany was going to defeat America and all of that
stuff. And I tell you, the kids really did resent
it. And it was very anti-German. And
I noticed a change. I kind of felt sorry for the
youngster. But I never heard anymore. I think they
moved to Houston. But the mother, one reason they
resented them, because this boy's grandmother
lived with them, lived there for years, and she
couldn't talk a word of English. And I think all of
them talked German when they got home. And other
people didn't like that. Oh, I think... I think we
accused them unjustly. That's why I said that in a
state of anger.
But
I never did resent him. I spoke to him when I saw him,
but that was about as close as I ever got to him. But I
could notice in the classroom the attitude of the
other kids. youngsters can be pretty mean. Oh,
they can, yes, they certainly can. Why'd you come
to Texas A&M in 1919, wasn't it? Yes, my father took
me to the train and he says, what course are you
going to take? I came here because he was such a firm
believer in the school. And because he had taken
some of these short courses during the summer?
Yes, well, his nephew, My first cousin was head of
the animal husbandry department at that time. Oh,
really? John C. Burns.
He was in class in 1905, I believe, and A.C. Burns
finished in 1907, and then went to Ohio State and
studied by doing medicine.
And then Douglas Burns, who was later general
manager of the Pitchfork Ranch,
graduated in 16. So those three brothers came
here, and they all did so well. And my father just,
for one thing, he tried to send those. Now, I had one
brother who went to Vanderbilt to study medicine.
But the other two that were ranchers, especially
Tom, he played hooky, and I doubt if he went beyond
second or third grade, and probably the best
businessman in the whole family. And just a
self-made man, so to speak. But he sure didn't get
it out of school.
And he was a huckleberry thing.
But I remember when my father and my mother were
getting married, my aunt, she was an advisor for
the family. Everybody would have problems,
they'd go to Aunt Ella. And she told my mother, she
says, Anna, you're going to have trouble with Tom.
That's the oldest brother of mine. You're going to
have trouble.